docs: Add the documentation for running FCL on RPi (#218)
flatcar-linux/flatcar-docs: docs/installing/bare-metal/raspberry-pi.md

---
title: Running Flatcar Container Linux on Raspberry Pi 4
linktitle: Running on Raspberry Pi 4
weight: 10
---
### Hardware Requirements

- A Raspberry Pi 4
- Form of storage, either USB and/or SD card. USB 3.0 drive is recommended for the better performance in terms of price.
- Display (via micro HDMI/HDMI/Serial Cables)
- Keyboard

---

> ### ⚠️ WARNING ⚠️

Author: @t-lo cc'ing you here - for you to read and comment if the tone sounds good.

> ### ⚠️ WARNING ⚠️

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Before we start
**A word of warning**:
```

> - The UEFI firmware used in this guide is an [_UNOFFICIAL_ firmware](https://rpi4-uefi.dev/faq/#Is_this_an_official_Raspberry_Pi_Foundation_project). There is a possibility of damage caused due to the usage of this firmware.

Reviewer 2: I think pointing out possibility of damage is excessive and likely to scare people.
"The UEFI firmware used in this guide is an unofficial firmware, provided under an open source BSD license."
The license already states:
```
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
```

Reviewer 2: The later point:
` Please follow the documentation at your own risk.`
is also sufficient.

> - Flatcar Container Linux support for Raspberry Pi is still in it's early stages and is not thoroughly tested.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Flatcar Container Linux support for Raspberry Pi is still in its early stages and is not thoroughly tested.
```

- Deploy Flatcar Container Linux on the hardware for purely fun and learning. 
- Please follow the documentation at your own risk.

---

### Update the EEPROM

> The Raspberry PI 4 use an EEPROM to boot the system. Before proceeding ahead, it is recommended to update the EEPROM. Raspberry Pi OS automatically updates the bootloader on system boot. In case you are using Raspberry Pi OS already, then the bootloader may be already updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Raspberry PI 4 uses an EEPROM to boot the system. Before proceeding ahead, it is recommended to update the EEPROM. Raspberry Pi OS automatically updates the bootloader on system boot. In case you are using Raspberry Pi OS already, then the bootloader may be already updated.
```

For manually updating the EEPROM, you can either use the Raspberry Pi Imager or the raspi-config. The former is the recommended method in the [Raspberry Pi documentation](https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/raspberry-pi.html#raspberry-pi-4-boot-eeprom).

We will also see later how the RPi4 UEFI firmware needs a recent version of EEPROM.

#### Using the Raspberry Pi Imager (Recommended)

- Install the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) software. You can also look for the software in your distribution repository.
- Launch `Raspberry Pi Imager`.
- Select `Misc utility images` under `Operating System`.
- Select `Bootloader`.
- Select the boot-mode, `SD`, `USB`
- Select the appropriate storage, `SD` or `USB`
- Boot the Raspberry Pi with the new image and wait for at least 10 seconds.
- The green activity LED will blink with a steady pattern and the HDMI display will be green on success.
- Power off the Raspberry Pi and disconnect the storage.

##### Using the raspi-config

> - Update the `rpi-eeprom` package.

Reviewer 2: This needs the context that it needs to be executed from a running RaspberryPI OS.

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt full-upgrade
sudo apt install rpi-eeprom
```
- Run `sudo raspi-config`
- Select `Advanced Options`.
- Select `Bootloader Version`
- Select `Latest` for latest Stable Bootloader release.
- Reboot

##### Using the rpi-eeprom-update

> - Update the `rpi-eeprom` package.

Reviewer 2: This needs the context that it needs to be executed from a running RaspberryPI OS.

# file. This is useful usually in case when you want
# features yet to be made available on the default channel.

# Install the update
sudo rpi-eeprom-update -a

# A reboot is needed to apply the update
# To cancel the update, you can use: sudo rpi-eeprom-update -r
sudo reboot
```

### Installing Flatcar

##### Install `flatcar-install` script

Flatcar provides a simple installer script that helps install Flatcar Container Linux on the target disk. The script is available on [Github](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flatcar-linux/init/flatcar-master/bin/flatcar-install), and the first step would be to install the script in the host system.

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
# You may also add `PATH` export to your shell profile, i.e bashrc, zshrc etc.
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin

curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flatcar-linux/init/flatcar-master/bin/flatcar-install
chmod +x flatcar-install
mv flatcar-install ~/.local/bin
```

##### Install Flatcar on the target device

Now that the `flatcar-install` script is installed in the host machine, go ahead and install the Flatcar Container Linux image on the target device.

> The target device could be a USB or SD Card. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The target device could be a USB drive or SD Card. 
```

  },
  "networkd": {},
  "passwd": {
    "users": [
      {
        "name": "core",
        "sshAuthorizedKeys": [
          <Insert your SSH Keys here>
        ]
      }
    ]
  },
  "storage": {
    "files": [
      {
        "filesystem": "OEM",
        "path": "/grub.cfg",
        "append": true,
        "contents": {
          "source": "data:,set%20linux_console%3D%22console%3DttyAMA0%2C115200n8%20console%3Dtty1%22%0Aset%20linux_append%3D%22flatcar.autologin%20usbcore.autosuspend%3D-1%22%0A",
          "verification": {}
        },
        "mode": 420
      }
    ],
    "filesystems": [
      {
        "mount": {
          "device": "/dev/disk/by-label/OEM",
          "format": "btrfs"
        },
        "name": "OEM"
      }
    ]
  },
  "systemd": {}
}
```

Go ahead with the write on the target device
```
sudo flatcar-install -d /dev/sda -C stable -B arm64-usr -o '' -i config.json
```

If you already have the image downloaded you can use the `-f` param to specify the path of the local image file.
```
sudo flatcar-install -d /dev/sda -C stable -B arm64-usr -o '' -i config.json -f flatcar_production_image.bin.bz2
```

##### Raspberry Pi 4 UEFI Firmware

> [rpi-uefi community](https://rpi4-uefi.dev) ships a SBBR-compliant(UEFI+ACPI), ArmServerReady ARM64 firmware for Raspberry Pi 4. We would be using the same to UEFI boot Flatcar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[rpi-uefi community](https://rpi4-uefi.dev) ships a SBBR-compliant(UEFI+ACPI), ArmServerReady ARM64 firmware for Raspberry Pi 4. We will be using it to UEFI boot Flatcar.
```

`v1.17` of the [pftf/RPi4](https://github.com/pftf/RPi4/releases/tag/v1.17) introduced two major changes:
- Firstly, it enabled firmware boot directly from the USB. This is particularly helpful if you are using the installation process using a USB device.
- Secondly, support for directly placing the Pi boot files into the EFI System Partition (ESP). This feature was not implemented in the firmware, rather from the upstream firmware from Raspberry Pi Foundation. This is why it is recommended to update the Pi EEPROM at the very beginning.

Let's move ahead with the final steps.

- Place the UEFI firmware into the EFI System Partition.

```bash

> efipartition=$(lsblk /dev/sda -oLABEL,PATH | awk '$1 == "EFI-SYSTEM" {print $2}')

Reviewer 2: Maybe repeat that /dev/sda needs to be the USB drive that we installed flatcar onto.
